Young nature-lovers had their best photographs showcased, the EU put the brakes on fast fashion and the “domino effect” of battery innovation was highlighted, plus more good news

This week’s good news roundup

The RSPCA showcased the next generation of wildlife photographers
Images of a furry tarantula, a psychedelic jellyfish and a singing dog were among the winning shots wowing the judges of this year’s RSPCA Young Photographer Awards.

The overall victor – and the youngest ever to clinch the top prize – was eight-year-old Jamie Smart from Powys, Wales, with a timely and striking closeup of her pet turkey Frederick. 

The annual contest attracted more than 6,500 entries for 2023, and RSPCA president Chris Packham said every young snapper had helped create a kinder world for animals. “As our young photographers head out into nature in search of a shot, they’re connecting with the animals we share our world with,” he noted. “They’re observing, learning and showing respect. They become citizen scientists, activists and messengers.”

Image: Jamie Smart

good news alessandra moretti
The EU put the brakes on fast fashion
The European Union has struck a note for sustainability by banning the destruction of unsold clothes and footwear. 

Big retailers have two years to get in line with the new measure, while SMEs have been granted up to six years to comply. It’s part of a broader sustainability drive aimed at tackling premature obsolescence and making products easier to repair and upgrade. 

MEP Alessandra Moretti (pictured) has spearheaded the legislation and said it was time to “end the model of ‘take, make, dispose.’”

“Sustainable products will become the norm, allowing consumers to save energy, repair and make smart environmental choices when they are shopping,” she said. “Banning the destruction of unsold textiles and footwear will also contribute to a shift in the way fast fashion manufacturers produce their goods.”

Image: 91mattia


A groundbreaking menopause treatment got the green light
Hundreds of thousands of women are set to benefit from a gamechanging drug that prevents menopausal hot flushes, after it was cleared for use in the UK.

Over two-thirds of women going through the menopause experience hot flushes, also known as vasomotor symptoms (VMS), which can disrupt sleep and exercise, and severely impact daily life.

Fezolinetant stops them by blocking a brain protein which helps regulate body temperature. It will be available privately on prescription from next month after winning the approval of the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency. 

It’s not cheap, however – a 30-day supply costs $550 (£430) in the US. Manufacturer Astellas hopes to make the drug, marketed as Veoza, available on the NHS at a later date. 

The British Menopause Society said in a statement that it was delighted with the news. “It is likely to offer many women experiencing VMS considerable improvement in their day-to-day quality of life,” the charity added.

Image: Alex Starnes


Prisoners lent a helping hand to a recycling effort
Prisoners on the island of Jersey in the Channel are tackling the knotty problem of fishing waste in a pilot scheme aimed at improving recycling. 

Fishers leave unwanted gear at a drop-off point in La Collette in St. Helier and it is sent to Prison La Moye for sorting. The mixed waste would otherwise have been discarded, but inmates have recovered over 14 tonnes of rope, 68 pots and 2,000m of net. 

Government of Jersey marine science and research officer, Alex Plaster, said he hoped recovered materials could be sent to the UK for recycling. “The prison service have been doing a fantastic job with this project, their dedication to it has been incredible. Without them, none of this would be possible,” he said. 

Gemma Lofthouse, head of reducing reoffending at the Jersey Prison Service, added: “The prisoners are determined to do a good job and do their bit for the climate emergency, working at an incredible pace to get the job done.”

Image: Krisztian Tabori